Tashile, warm greetings. Warm greetings. Thank you. Thanks for joining, friends. As always,
it's such a special opportunity to be together, study, contemplate, and practice the holy Dharma.
So we'll reconnect to our motivation and shine on these three essential points of our practice
right at the beginning and try to keep them going through the middle and then resolve again
into the end to shine on this renunciation, Bodhichitta and pure perception. So renunciation,
this joy and just very kind of like sincere, kind of luscious, kind of sizzling, kind of
closeness feeling for all the special things we have going in our favor now to connect
with the Dharma and this body and this world system, these precious teachings taught by
these precious teachers amongst this precious community. So really kind of like let that
sizzle on and just kind of temporarily at least put aside the things that we're not so happy
with or that are a little more kind of not so comfortable for us. Just kind of we have
a short little window together and we'll just kind of set those things aside for this brief
little window at least, kind of be more in the gratitude, a mode of joy, kind of a deep
kind of contentment, this nourishing quality of being in a space of Dharma. And then secondly,
this living experience of Bodhichitta, the heart mind of awakening or of enlightenment
to really let ourselves kind of connect with that essential goodness we have and the goodness
and others and all beings, all of us wanting to be happy and wanting to not be suffering,
not go through all this dissatisfaction. We all have this tenderness that we really do
want to have an ongoing kind of sense of peace and well-being and yet it's a fragile situation
that doesn't last so long. So I have this tenderness of heart and also this bravery
of heart that may I really be a healing balm in all circumstances for all beings I'm in
touch with. May I be the exact perfect medicine to heal all wounds, to celebrate all lovely
kind of amazing goodness expressions we have too. So this Bodhichitta, I really turn this
on that may all beings have liberation, freedom and may I take that responsibility to bring
that forth. And then thirdly, pure perception, not getting so hooked by our kind of how convinced
we are that something's bad, something's wrong, that something's broken or stuck or needs
to be removed or is stained, it's covered, kind of temporarily at least setting that
kind of way of vision, like putting that down, relaxing that a little bit, and instead connecting
to that openness quality of our mind and of our heart. Kind of fresh, glowing, really
connected sense of kind of this tenderness that really also kind of has this inherent
dignity and this bright kind of brilliant prajna quality. My connect to that inner goodness
is vajra pride or pure perception. So we bring kind of lighten all these three all at once
and then in one sense just say we're being natural, kind of reconnect to our own nature.
So the topic for this brief time together today is specifically we're going to kind
of circle around and explore the theme of receiving lineage blessings. What does it
mean to receive lineage blessings? So this is such a deep, profound, very crucial, important
topic for all practitioners, for Buddhists, for Mahayana Buddhists, for Vajrayana Buddhists.
This is like such a critically important, special, really important aspect of our study
and our practice, receiving lineage blessings. And so I'm kind of in one way, a little, I'm
kind of always there's a question for me of having it be a living experience, the dharma.
So I kind of, this is such a deep, really important topic, blessings, receiving blessings,
connecting to lineage blessings. And there's a lot of ways to go about kind of exploring
this or opening this. And that freshness of the inquiry is that it has to be alive and
living. And at the kind of truth of my situation, my capabilities is I'm very limited. So I'm
kind of in one way, I want to be spontaneous. In another way, it's like jumping off a clip
and hoping I can fly. So I'm going to rely on the words of the Buddha here. And we're
really following the footsteps of the Buddha and of Guru Rinpoche and these lineage masters.
Receiving lineage blessings. What is lineage? This is one I'm in my kind of reflection for
some time. This is one of the aspects of Buddhism and Vajrayana Buddhism in particular, that's
an outstanding, brilliant quality. That we have an uninterrupted, stainless living lineage.
It goes all the way back from now all the way into the past to the Buddha Shakyamuni,
and it's uninterrupted. This is really such an extraordinary quality of Buddhism in the
world today. And yet, receiving lineage blessings always comes down to my mind, to my heart.
And technically speaking with Buddhists and refer oftentimes to this as the view. What
is the view I'm holding, tawa? In one way, you can think of that as like how available
am I to really be in touch with reality? With the truth? How like really, how ready am I
to really honestly, vulnerably let my real experience right now be fully informed with
the truth of reality? There's a common Tibetan saying about like the amount of blessings
you receive depends on how you see your teacher. That comes down to the view. In view, we can
think of it in one way as like a philosophical thing. Like we can try to designate it as
an actual position or some kind of worldview, a way of poisoning the mind. But in a more
kind of simple everyday way, view is just every single moment we show up with some kind
of this world that we seem to be in here. Every single moment we show up with this very
convincing grand narrative, each of us, every instant. And it puts me at the center in an
environment. And my view highlights all kinds of things in the space. What I pay attention
to, what I'm frustrated with, what I'm thinking of now, the kind of taste I have in my mouth,
what I'm expecting to come, the mood I'm in. Do I feel good about myself or not? Is there
something in this situation I'm not comfortable with or something I really like? These are
all layers of a view. It's literally a world I'm creating right now, this moment. So view
isn't just like an idea to hold, like I'm in a mind only school view now. That's one
really big box way of framing view, which is what we're talking about as lineage blessing.
That's one way of framing how available I am to connect with the nature, with reality,
my own nature and other beings nature. That view, the aperture, the layering, the really
like availability I am to have, to be in response of responsibly in touch with all the layers
of interdependent reality. That's called a view. And in terms of receiving lineage blessing,
how much I receive lineage blessing, how I understand what that even means depends on
my view. And so one of the things I thought to highlight during this time is the amazing
quality in Buddhism that it has this nested ecology of all of these views. And they all
interrelate in a really organic mutually communicative, totally comprehensive and coherent way. N
yingma
school causes the nine yanas, the nine vehicles. And each of these approaches or vehicles,
these views that then become meditations, that then inform our conduct of behavior,
that then usher in a result or a fruition. Each of these vehicles is a whole world unto
itself and every single moment it arises. The view arises right now, which what am I
sustaining the view? That's the meditation. And how am I moving and speaking in space?
That's my behavior. And then what is that going to lead to? What's the next moment going
to be? That's the fruition. Every single moment I'm creating this world through my view. And
Buddhism has all of these worlds. It's not, it doesn't believe there's just one preset given
world out there. Just like it doesn't believe there's one preset given me in here. It all
depends on the view. So to jump right in, there's four philosophical schools in Buddhism. The
Vibhāśika, Srātrāntrika, Mind-Only or Chitamatra, and Madhyamaka or Middle Way. And they're
defined
differently. They're distinguished from one another by their view, meditation, conduct,
and fruition. And each of these is an ecology. Each of these is a world. And they communicate
with each other in a natural, organic fashion. So the first view, the most foundational Buddhist
view, Vibhāśika. What does it believe? Will all of these schools function in terms of two truths,
relative truth and absolute truth? And Vibhāśika school functions, it posits the belief. I'm
going
into the view, right? We're just, this is in one way, heady philosophy, but it's actually the
experience I'm believing in right now. What view I hold, it take for granted. The worldview I'm
assuming right now, my grand narrative, it's happening right now, whether I see it or not.
So we're trying to see the different views I could hold so I can be more conscious of which one do
I
want to choose to turn on, or to turn off, or to brighten, or to dim. That's talking about like
trying to be a more conscious participant of my experience. That's a practitioner in Buddhism.
So the Vibhāśika school, there's two things in relative reality. There's self and other.
And self is defined in two ways. There's a stream of instance of consciousness, irreducible moments
of mind in an ongoing succession, a continuum. That's one part. The second part is just the
felt sense of me. I'm me. I'm the center of the universe. I'm ongoing in an uninterrupted
fashion, and I'm more important than everything else. That's the typical sentient sense of me.
And in terms of the other, there's two things. Time and space.
On the Vibhāśika view, they believe time is composed of irreducible units of time.
There's a smallest teeny, teeny, teeny, tiny moment of time.
And then space. There's a tiny irreducible moment of space. It's called a partless particle.
So wow, this seems in one way really abstract.
Irreducible moments of mind, a felt sense of me, irreducible moments of time,
irreducible units of space. This is the standard modern scientific view.
They haven't found what it is. They're looking for tow, theory of everything, the theory that
connects the strong, weak electromagnetic and gravitational forces to describe at least the
material world. They're looking for what's the irreducible ground of reality. That's called
modern science. They're still looking for that. Vibhāśika view, it doesn't assume a ground. It
does assume these tiny little particles that all aggregate in these little bunches that then
cohere into larger bunches and larger bunches into the bigger aggregates of a sense of me,
mind, time and space. This is all a view. In an everyday world, we assume this view.
If we're in a good mood, because usually I'm just want to hit somebody or something.
It's not a non-Buddhist view. It's just like I'm thinking about my greed happening or I'm worried
about this or I'm hungry. I'm not even looking at my mind at all. I'm just happening. Whatever
view turns on, I'm not thinking about irreducible subatomic particles whizzing around and stuff.
But okay, if we really tune into like what modern science has given us, it gives us according to
more or less this view, Vibhāśika view. This is the first school in Buddhism.
Saltrāntrika then says, okay, how would I ever know what the irreducible particle of time and
spaces are this moment of mind? And they say you wouldn't. It's so fine. It's so small.
And so what we ever know in Vibhāśika view is called a representational correspondence theory
of reality. I have an idea or an image or an impression that kind of generally represents
or kind of overlays on itself onto what's absolutely true, which is these universal
actual things that are there that I can never directly perceive. All I ever perceive is my
representation of them. And this is like a teeny minuscule, like very fine tuned representations
of mind and space and time. Okay, so I'm not ever in touch with an irreducible partless
particle or something. I'm only ever seeing my perception of them. Okay, so that's basically
real. I'm saying this is really basic. This is basic saltrāntrika view. Then mind only school,
the third philosophical view says that makes no sense. In one way, they're pointing out that
Cartesian duality makes no sense. How would mind and non mind ever interact? How would matter and
non matter ever interact? If they're two fundamentally different things, you have a
universal kind of essence of something. And then my representation of it, which is mind,
how would they ever touch? Because they're two fundamentally different types of thing.
So mind only school says it's all only mind. This is their fundamental view.
There's only mind. It's just mind experiencing its own energetic habits.
Mind awareness experiencing its mental ways of shaping and kind of representing back to itself.
There's only mind. And then those habits can be imaginary, totally diluted, referring to things
that don't exist at all, like a sense of ego. Buddhism says that's an imaginary object. It
doesn't actually exist anywhere in reality. And then there's dependently arisen natures.
There's actual ways that things do aggregate. Cause and effect does happen.
And then there's actually on the absolute truth is yundra, true nature of mind or wisdom mind.
But this mind is seen to be a truly existent mind. There actually is mind.
This is a view. The view is it's all mind.
Everything I ever experienced, remember, feel, anticipate, taste, touch, smell,
it's all only ever mind. That's a view.
And then manyamaka or middle way comes in as the fourth school and says, even that has an error,
that view. And there's two basic ways of approaching middle way school. It's all taught by the
Buddha.
The first is, there's no such thing as anything that has inherent existence.
Try to really find something that's singular, independent and permanent.
Singular meaning has no parts. Independent meaning isn't dependent on causes and conditions.
Permanent, unchanging. Try to find something like that.
That would, if you found it, it would be called truly existing, true existence or inherent
existence. And Buddha in middle way school, the middle way school Buddha said that is unfindable
because nothing exists like that. Everything is dependently arisen. So that's a relative way of
understanding mind only school. Then the absolute way of understanding mind only school is they
said
go beyond all conceptual designation. Even in having an idea that there is not a thing
that's singular, independent, permanent. That's just an idea. That's the product of a way of
thinking, a type of kind of holding the mind that produces images and concepts and representations
like that. It's called duality mind or consciousness sem. They say go beyond sem and you'll find
jhana or prajna, wisdom mind. It's not a thing. It's free of the four extremes. Doesn't exist
or doesn't not exist. Doesn't both exist to not exist. Doesn't neither exist nor not exist.
It goes beyond all conceptual designation. It's just how's it understood self reflexively through
wisdom awareness. This is a view. So am I in a view right now where there's all these aggregating,
buzzing, irreducible particles of time, space and mind? Am I in a view that says, hey, I'm only
ever
experiencing my own representation of what this is. I never can really actually know what's
happening. I only ever know my filter of what's happening. Thirdly, am I in a view that believes,
oh, this is mind. Every single thing I've ever experienced is only mind. There's only ever mind.
Or am I in a way of being that holds no position at all? It's total like flexible,
omniscient, wisdom ninja position. It's just true nature arising endlessly, ceaselessly.
Try to find it. It's unborn. Try to pin it down. It's not arising. It's not it's not abiding.
Try to find where it dissolves into. You can't. It's unceasing. This is a view.
This is the basis of Vajrayana Buddhism. So these four philosophical systems all happen within
Jana's one, two, and three. It's called Travaka Jana, Prajekta Buddha Jana, Bodhisattva Jana.
These four philosophical schools all happen in these first three kind of foundational
vehicles. And in addition to that is Tantra. And that's Jana's four, five, six, seven, eight, nine.
So when we open up a conversation about receiving lineage blessings,
the question that's most relevant is what is the view I'm holding?
Because that will determine what I'm available of reality to experience. Like how fine is my
attention, my awareness, how open is my heart to actually let reality inform my experience?
That's just called receiving lineage blessing. Lineages, each of these ways, each of these sets
of views that come with meditations, conducts and results, their entire world systems or
ecologies and use any one of them. Use the one that works for you and it'll lead to liberation
of oneself, of like one's mistaken sense of a self that's bound in these cycles of suffering.
They all will do it.
Okay, so going to what makes you not a Buddhist by Zog's our cancer.
Pidgey 108. The view is the core of any religion. At an interfaith conference, we may have no
choice
but to be diplomatic and agree that all religions are basically the same. But in fact, they have
very different views and no one but you yourself can judge if one view is better than another.
Only you as an individual with your own mental capacity, taste, feelings and upbringing can
choose the view that works for you. This is a Buddhist version of know thyself.
The view I'm assuming this moment, that determines what I see in experience.
So how available am I to receive lineage blessings? Because each of these views has
a Buddhist lineage with it. They're not contradictory. They're mutually so
enfolded within one another in a progressive inclusion that is more inclusive, more detailed,
more directly expressive of the nature. That's how the nine yanas unfold as the view becomes
more and more accurate. Three other quotes from this same book in this same chapter,
it's the conclusion. This is just like throwing pebbles in a pond. Okay. One's inflexible
self-righteousness takes up all the space that would allow empathy for others.
My view. One's inflexible self-righteousness takes up all the space that would allow empathy for
others.
Only my view is right. Right. Another one, page 115. When you see that you will never
come to the end of problem solving, that is the beginning of the search for inner truth.
When you see that you will never come to the end of problem solving,
that is the beginning of the search for inner truth.
This is a very middle way statement. There's no end. It just keeps going. So what are we
going to do about that? Try to find a definitive boundary of your view, of your world.
It's unfindable. So what to do?
That's the question that really activates the search for truth.
Nevertheless, 117, instead of worshiping truth and venerating sadhus,
this is an age that worships billboards and venerates liposuction.
Instead of worshiping truth and venerating sadhus,
If we only pay attention to the most superficial immediate attention grabbing features of reality,
that's how much blessing we get. We get what's right in front of us. There's no more depth.
It's just surface. We get a very superficial availability for receiving like to be informed
by reality, by truth. That's a function of our own view, where our mind goes to and gets hooked in.
And then lastly, even though these ecologies, these views, they all have this complete
integrity and coherence within themselves as worlds that lead to liberation.
Nevertheless, 122, Buddhism is not a survival kit for living.
Buddhism is not a survival kit for living. Buddhism is not designed to make everything
you want to come true. It doesn't give an answer to all the questions you have. It doesn't even
have an official marriage ceremony. Buddhism is about waking up. Buddhism is about freeing
all beings from suffering and the causes of suffering. And we use life in this situation
to the best we can with whatever's happening to actually engender the causes and conditions
for freedom to happen. Not so we get a nice house. This is a really important point.
Regardless of what view we kind of orient through, which is a question of our own mind,
our mindfulness sees what view am I in right now because the view constantly
change if my mind is fickle. The view constantly changes. So in this book, this is such an
important special book, "Ruby Rosary Joyfully Accepted by Vigidares and Dakinis is the Ornament
of a Necklace" by Tinley Norba Rinpoche. This is about the life, all the previous lives of
His Holiness Diju Rinpoche. It's so amazing. This book is a newish book. It's really, really
beautiful.
So regardless of which view and which ecology, which world system
we ourselves are in, and we choose because I'm letting my mind be in that view right now.
I have the full power to be in that view or not. It's my own mind viewing.
So regardless of that, Tinley Norba Rinpoche says here on page 230,
"For those of us who presume to be followers of the Buddha,
if we can each perfect our learning and contemplation within a particular jhana
that corresponds to our individual faculties and inclinations with its own threefold system of
basis, path, and result, then even though it may seem as if we have not served the Buddha's
teachings in vast ways, in fact it is the most beneficial and not allowing the teachings of
Buddha Shakyamuni to be contradicted or ruined from within."
Whichever view we show up with, whichever world we create for ourselves right now with my view,
meditation, action, and fruition, as long as I don't break the internal integrity of that ecology,
that world system, it will work. For example, if I go into a forest,
I have to work within the terms of the forest. If I go into the forest and just do whatever I
want in there, that's called breaking the forest. It'll disrupt what the forest allows, what it
affords, all the awesome things that its own internal ecology allows for. Similarly with a
liberative system, our own mind has to show up and pay attention to the internal dynamics
of how a view becomes a meditation, informs our conduct, and then leads to certain very specific
outcomes. We can't just mix and match. We're the ones that have to show up with integrity,
to actually listen to the world we're in, to be with it, not just to enforce our own
wants and desires on whatever's happening around us. We actually have to, to some degree, surrender
,
be receptive to, responsive with what's happening around us. There's an internal ecology of my view
there's an external ecology of all these things that are interdependently cohering and
communicating
with one another. Am I doing that in a cooperative fashion that's harmonious, based on good conduct
,
good ethics, general reciprocity, a sense of care and concern, a tenderness and openness of heart,
a genuine respect and reverence of the sacredness of the amazing kind of special magic
that every situation is this infinitely magical, nested system of all these causes and conditions
coming together? Am I engaging that with a tender respect, a humble humility, a careful attention,
or am I just enforcing myself on my situation? Am I trying to convert the world according to my
view?
Buddhism is really against conversion, because people have their own ways of making sense and
living life. Otherwise, it's really fundamentally violent.
And it's only this Penaribiche, it's only this Penaribiche.
He has a book, Ocean of Blessings, Heart Teachings of Drubong Penaribiche.
And here there's so many things, I mean there's so many books here of special things.
Page 10, he mentions about a monk, Sunakshatra. He was the attendant to Buddha Shakyamuni for
24 years. You ever heard of his name? Sunakshatra? The monk Sunakshatra was the Buddha's,
was sorry, the monk Sunakshatra was the Buddha Shakyamuni's half-brother and served him for 24
years. He knew by heart all the 12 categories of the teachings of the Batakas, but he saw
everything
the Buddha did as deceitful. Eventually he came to the erroneous conclusion that, apart from an
aura six feet wide, there was no difference between the Buddha and himself. So one day he told the
Buddha, "apart from the light around your body six feet wide, in 24 years as your servant I've
never seen even a sesame seed's worth of special qualities in you. And as for the Dharma, I know
as much as you, so I will no longer be your servant." Sunakshatra served the Buddha for 24
years and was totally unavailable to receive the blessings, the lineage teachings. He saw
everything
the Buddha did as deceitful. He could recite all the all the Batakas, the baskets of the Buddha's
teaching, but it just, like water off a duck's back, none of it was allowed to penetrate his heart,
to open his mind, to be in a state of receptive learning. It didn't benefit him at all.
Why? It's not that the teachings were erroneous, it's his own view was so distorted,
it was so self-convinced, it was so unavailable to learn anything,
that he didn't learn anything. Being around the Buddha every day for 24 years,
receiving lineage blessings. This is not some passive theistic thing, you don't just say I
want something and you get it. You have to tune into the nature. You have to, if you want a view
that's more inclusive, you have to turn that on in your own mind. This is like a beloved thing.
Venerable Kenpo Sowendoni Rinpoche, they wrote this book, this is based on teachings they gave,
"The Seven Nails, Final Testament of the Great Zogchen Master, Sri Sinha." Here, this is like,
almost like an unknown secret. In the very beginning, Venerable Kenpo Sowendoni Rinpoche,
he personally wrote all these amages to the Zogchen masters during our time. These prayers here,
they're so beautiful and he composed them himself.
The first is to the primordial Buddha Kunduzampo, the great protector, right?
The moment the original appearances arose from the primordial ground, you recognized and liberated
them, abiding in that natural state, beyond cause and result, completing perfectly the two merits,
enlightened before any buddhas, homage to the first Buddha.
He then goes on to pay homage to Garv Dorje, Manjushri Mitra, Sri Sinha, Guru Rinpoche,
Vimala Mitra, Vyrochana, His Holiness Dhujhir Rinpoche, and Venerable Kenshin Paldhinshara
Rinpoche. Living lineage masters, to this moment and our experience, we totally depend on them
for the teachings we receive now. They've all come through them. These are the living
lineage masters that fully accomplish these teachings. So that's part of receiving lineage
blessings. There's an outer way of just perceiving kind of in a more literal way. There's actually
these lineage of masters, but what they're pointing to is if we go back to those four philosophical
schools, there's not even a thing to point to. What, a teeny tiny irreducible particle?
A teeny tiny figment of a fragment of a filter of an imaginary representation? Mind? They're
pointing to just mind? Like clouds in the sky? There's no pointer. There's no point to that.
There's no pointing. What is it we're praying to? What does it mean to be a living lineage master?
What are we praying? This is like an actual blessing stream of wisdom,
wisdom, an uninterrupted living wisdom continuum, because it's actually happening.
Dependently arisen mere appearance like a rainbow in the sky.
It's more real than anything else, and it's still just a rainbow.
But if we use this rainbow, if we tune into the wisdom blessings,
this rainbow will help us see that everything is a rainbow. It's all lineage blessing.
If we tune into the teacher, they'll help us see everything as the teacher. They'll help us see
everything as the Dharma. They'll help us see that everything is the nature happening. This is all
living Dharma. And if we have a view that big, that inclusive, it just means we become natural.
We finally just let go of all these ways we've shielded our view.
We become fully receptive and responsive to lineage blessing. We become lineage.
Uphold the lineage. We're just being natural. We're upholding our naturalness.
The yoga, like that's the sense of yoga in Buddhism. We're just abiding in what's natural.
Or Vidyadhara, we're abiding in awareness, holding awareness of the true nature.
That's this unfabricated view. This is a full, full interdependence, a full beyond any designation,
total immersive experience of wisdom blessing, of receiving wisdom lineage.
But we need the supports to have this actually be a lived experience.
We can't just recite teachings. And we can't just say, like Kempo Ramache says, often,
oh, I went to this teaching that year and this teaching that, and I got this wang and that wang,
and here's all my protection cords and all that. This doesn't do anything for us.
Not if we just stay hard inside. Just becomes another thing of spiritual materialism, right?
Another way to bypass dealing with the difficulty, the challenge of living life.
This becomes a mere philosophy, a theoretical patch that eventually falls off.
We have to let the Dharma absorb into our hearts. And mostly we do that through compassion,
through actually caring about others. We're not so self-righteous
that we stop paying attention to other people's kind of lived experience too.
These other beings, they help us with so much. We depend on them so intimately for everything we
have.
So like this great master, Thukur Urjanirbhaje, repeating the words of the Buddha, it says these
two engines of enlightenment are devotion and compassion. Devotion is kind of more principally
what we've been talking about here a little bit. This is page 63 in this first edition.
If we want to quickly awaken to Buddhahood, it is essential to unite means and knowledge.
Whatever conceptual practice we do should ideally be combined with the recognition of mind essence.
Devotion and compassion are the heart of conceptual Dharma practice.
The great masters of the cogulinus state that it is delusion to count on any method for recognizing
mind essence other than purifying obscurations, gathering the accumulations, and relying on
the blessings of a realized master. This doesn't mean that no matter how smart or strong you are,
sorry, this means that no matter how smart or strong you we are, if we don't follow a master
and instead stubbornly push ourselves through years of meditation training without developing
compassion and devotion, purifying obscurations, and gathering the accumulations, we will remain
deluded. The essence of both devotion and compassion is actually the same. It is a kind of love.
Whether that feeling is directed towards enlightened pure beings or ordinary impure
beings, whether it is devotion or compassion, the essence remains the same. The mind is laid bare
of thoughts at the moment the empty essence dawns nakedly and can be directly perceived.
And the cogulinus devotion is always said to be the main quality to focus on. And so the cogulinus
is called the lineage of devotion. But compassion or devotion are the same in facilitating the
realization of mind essence. To reiterate, our training and devotion, compassion, purifying the
obscurations, and gathering the accumulations should be combined with recognizing mind essence.
Otherwise, to reach enlightenment using means without knowledge takes a tremendously long time.
Three eons, according to the Sutra path, the Vajrayana path is much more swift.
So devotion and compassion make us receptive
to showing up for reality the truth for our own experience.
Devotion and compassion.
Almost done. You're great. Thank you.
The Vajras sound of peace, practicing the seven chapter prayer of Guru Padma Sambhava. This is by
the Venerable Kempurim, which is this is a just treasure trove. I'm just like, pithy, like living
electric lineage blessing. This book is amazing. Okay, so here, page 217.
217. The Gyaqig is a vine or a creeper. It grows with other plants. In Tibet, it's used for herbal
medicine. And because it has red color, it's also used to dye woolen robes. The Gyaqig will not
grow
in high altitudes. And because it requires hot weather, it is sorry, it thrives mostly in southern
Tibet. Guru Padma Sambhava used the example of the Gyaqig plant and the heat that gives it life to
make an important point about devotion. He said that if one's path is a field without devotion,
the sprout of enlightenment will not grow without trust and confidence in the three jewels. The
blessings will be very distant. This means that if we have trust and confidence in the three jewels
,
the blessings will be very close. Guru Padma Sambhava continued by saying, listen, prince,
the only purpose of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas attaining enlightenment is to benefit all beings.
Therefore, their beneficial activities for sentient beings are unceasing. Yet because
sentient beings minds are so densely saturated with the five poisons, and their ego clinging
is so powerful, even the Buddhas and bodhisattvas who continually work to help all beings cannot
completely empty their sufferings and difficulties. Prince, since you want to help your own
children,
as well as all your subjects in Tibet, both now and in the future, as your legacy, tell them to
first develop infallible confidence and trust in their hearts. And with that infallible devotion,
they must absolutely rely on the three jewels and pray in the following way.
And then Guru Rinpoche goes on to recite the prayer to Prince Mutri Sempo, which is one of the
seven
chapter prayers here. So in these different ways, I've been trying to open the sense of what is
devotion. Because it's not a theistic path in Buddhism. It's not a blind faith path. The Buddha
encouraged us to look for ourselves. And fundamentally, that comes down to look at how
my own mind is looking. What view am I holding? And whatever view I feel comfortable with holding,
as long as it's one of these Buddhist views, meaning an audience with compassion towards
actually looking towards the truth, and maintaining that inquiry until we realize the truth. As
long
as it's one of those views, we will wake up. We will become free of suffering and the causes of
suffering. It's so many masters have accomplished this according to all of these yanas. So we have
to find out which one I'm comfortable with and pursue that inquiry and keep going and be
intelligent about what supports that inquiry to keep going. What helps keep me open to the living
dharma and my experience? What are the supportive conditions that make that come alive for me? And
they change over time because my view changes. So I have to check in with what's my view now,
and not just what's my view now, but I have to fabricate if my view now is not so healthy,
it's not so lined up with being natural with a dharma, with compassion, with devotion, with
renunciation, bodhicitta, pure perception, then I need to turn those on. I need to fabricate that.
It's called using duality to go beyond duality. This is a very Vajrayana essential point.
So the last thing to end on a fun note,
the lion's roar, an introduction to tantra by Shuryam Trungpa Rinpoche. This is, I think,
maybe one of the earlier editions. Lion's roar. I was randomly looking through this. There's just
so many, all these teachings nowadays, it's like we're, there's so many available dharma teachings
that are reliable. I mean, it's just astounding. There's not so many people who read them or
practice them even less, or they always say that, you know, it's each time we go further on the
path,
it's like less and less people will do it. And it's true. I mean, I know for myself, you know,
like, it's like, you know, I'm a finicky practitioner, I'm a finicky dharma person,
you know, some day's nice, some day's not, you know, it's very fickle and trying to make myself
more steadily receptive to being in touch with reality. But here we go. The lion's roar by Trungpa
Rinpoche, page 116 in this edition. Okay. So, receiving lineage blessings. Self-ego tries to
maintain itself and develop its territory. Should that be encouraged or discouraged? Should we try
to maintain our selfhood or should we not? What would you say? Then there's a question and answer.
Student, who should? Trungpa Rinpoche, I beg your pardon? Student, who should try to maintain
itself? Trungpa Rinpoche, who is he? Student, should we? Who? Trungpa Rinpoche, who is we or who?
Student, should we try to maintain ourselves? Who is we? Trungpa Rinpoche, I'm asking you.
Student, I don't know. Trungpa Rinpoche, who is that? Who is that?
Silence. Trungpa Rinpoche, did you say you don't know? Student, well, I suppose who is that?
Trungpa Rinpoche, yes, but who isn't that? Student, who isn't that?
Trungpa Rinpoche, moreover, what are you talking about? Laughter, then silence.
Trungpa Rinpoche, who are you? Student, I don't know. Trungpa Rinpoche, why don't you know? Why?
Student, there's no way of answering the question. Trungpa Rinpoche, why not?
Student, nothing works. Trungpa Rinpoche, why should it work?
Silence. Trungpa Rinpoche, it's not a matter of conmanship. Things don't have to work.
Let's warm up. Why should it work? Who are you? Why should it work? Who are you? Why should it work
?
Student, it just stopped.
Trungpa Rinpoche, stopped. Student, the questioning.
Trungpa Rinpoche, where does it stop? Where? Where?
Silence. Trungpa Rinpoche, how come it stopped there?
Student, I guess you can't focus anymore. Other things start happening.
Trungpa Rinpoche, understand that.
We all show that common symptom. So much is happening that we find the whole thing bewildering,
unable to focus on any one particular thing. The whole thing is bewildering, bewildered,
constantly bewildered, constantly all over the place. We are so confused, bewildered, subject
to confusion. We are a victim of confusion. What shall we do? Shall we stay, try to get some sleep,
get some food, or shall we try to get out of it? If you try to get out of it, it means putting in
a lot of energy. Trying to get out means creating some kind of scheme so that you could get out of
this prison. Could we do that? Couldn't we do that? How can we do that? Do you want to get out
or do you want to stay in? It's very inviting, smooth nest, like being a worm. You could regenerate
your next generation. You could retain yourself constantly by being a worm, or you could stick
your neck out by being a crocodile. You could. So a beautiful quality of Buddhism, of every view in
Buddhism, it dissolves itself. It dissolves itself into a greater view, a more natural way of being
,
a more inclusive way of communicating. It self-composts until we don't hold any view
so that we can equally engage all the views with love and compassion and wisdom.
When we try to play little tricks with our own views, little language games, when we try to avoid
being responsible for what view am I in now? What world did I just create for everyone to have to
be
in? When we keep kicking that can down the road and we don't take actual accountability and
responsibility for the view that my mind is in right now, then we become unavailable to receive
lineage blessing. Because we think we know it all. We have a view, it has a boundary,
and anything outside of that boundary which is basically infinite reality, we're unavailable. Why?
Because we set that boundary and we were convinced that that's the way it is. My view.
And that fundamental fixation or grasping is exactly what we have to dissolve in Buddhism.
And this is the only way to receive lineage blessing.
So little by little, we'll continue on the path. And every session, every moment of nundro,
every moment of presence, every moment of heart-felt compassion and love and tenderness,
of wisdom, of wakefulness, it all matters. Every little bit opens up our view. Every bit of virtue,
every bit of empty, kind of empty, flexible, full awareness helps our own view be informed by more
reality, by more truth. In Buddhism, we're so fortunate. All these nested systems, all these
worlds that we can explore and enjoy. But when it comes down to it as practitioners, we have to
pick
one that we're in, and we have to do it with integrity, according to the internal coherence
of that system, that view. Otherwise, we make a total mess of it.
And in the end, it'll just be time we spent being a Buddhist for a while until we decide not to be,
and go into, "Oh, the desert gets boring, so then we want to go to the ocean."
And we've all committed as bodhisattvas and Vajrayana. We're not going to make that mistake.
There's no place to escape to. Interdependence, there's no way out of interdependence. And we've
committed to staying here until every single being is free from being stuck in some self-made
corner
of interdependence. We really made that heartfelt commitment. I'm like, "I want to honor that
commitment. I've made that promise aspiration." And little by little, take these steps connecting
to the lineage blessing by doing practice, opening, poisoning myself to connecting to the nature,
seeing how I close up, releasing again, again and again and again and again,
until I'm not convinced there's actually some problem to solve. This is just interdependence
happening. This is just a dream happening. Then finally, I can relax and just be natural.
Then today, it's called that. That's really the final view, boundless, endless, kind of incon
ceivable
view. Thank you, friends. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
So for receiving lineage blessings, after exploring very quickly some of the different views
that we might be holding in our mind, and therefore how we're shaping our experience,
our reality, our world, I thought to emphasize that it's actually a really simple opening of mind,
an opening of heart, to really connect to the lineage, to connect to this kind of this powerful,
the wisdom, the compassion, the tenderness. It's just right there available. And I think it's very
safe to say that each of us have experienced like a moment of just awe and wonder and kind of this
grace and a total empowerment in the sense of uplifted goodness and just natural, fresh fulfillment
.
It's not this foreign thing. I think each of us have tasted that. We've been in that. We've seen
that. And the path is just kind of being that way more, being more available to that. And I think,
as we all know too, especially for Buddhists, Buddhist practitioners, we're studying and
practicing the path. It's a very involved process. And there's a lot of tenderizing moments to
again
and again release this grasping we have, this fixation. It's quite a sticky process to honestly
look at, look in my mind, look in my habits, and to put the energy to release, to set down some
of these negative habits and to cultivate the virtuous ones and just really let go and relax
to really surrender to that goodness. It's very involved. And we have that
just amazing fortune that this, in that process of undoing, of self-dissolving, which means of
self-opening, of including more, we, there already is this infinite field of like boundless wisdom
and compassion that we're supported by. A Dharma brother once said, you know, I think a lot of the
path is just getting enough energy that we break through the atmosphere and just line up into the
orbit of the lineage blessing stream that's already happening. And we're kind of in one way just
trying
to get enough launch energy to get out of our usual orbit of me-hood and just to like let
ourselves be natural and like in that tiny opening shift, like the blessings are there.
These great masters are there. Their wisdom presence is there. And like as the final
end to this like statement, I'm not just making this up. Again, in Penner Rinpoche's book,
Ocean of Blessings, on page seven he says, "There are many practitioners who've realized the nature
of mind and attain perfect enlightenment just by doing guru yoga. Being introduced to the nature
of one's mind can happen only through the master's blessings and without the blessings nothing will
happen. This is not something that can be bought and no matter how learned a scholar you may become
,
without a qualified master, it's not possible to recognize the true nature of mind.
As this is the root of the practice, without blessings, there's no way to attain enlightenment
and the path to Buddhahood is blocked. There's no other way to discover the nature of your mind.
You can't buy it or find it anywhere other than through the blessings of a qualified master.
That is why the single most important practice in Dharma is guru yoga. And that is why the single
most important practice in Dharma is guru yoga. And then he goes on to this say two pages later,
"Whether those blessings enter your being depends not on the object of your devotion,
but on your own mind. We've all heard this story about the old lady who had incredible faith and
devotion towards a dog's tooth, thinking that it was the Buddha's tooth. Though it was just a dog's
tooth, she received the Buddha's blessings and attained enlightenment, which was due not to the
tooth, but entirely to her strong faith and devotion." So just this simple turning of mind
or opening apart in one way, it's so simple, but it makes all the difference. So yeah, be brave
and bold like the nature is there to support us. So really, thank you for continuing on the path,
all of us.